Target optimization Zen 2

maximum number of load and store operations in 1 cycle is
2 loads and 1 store operations

2 load per cycle is only allowed if both loads are in different banks.
The DC banks that are accessed by loads are determined by the address bit 5:2, the size of the load, and the way.


The instruction fetch unit reads 32 bytes per cycle from a 32 KiB, 8-way set associative, parity protected L1 instruction cache (IC)
So to fetch one cache line from the L1 I cache it will first fetch 32 byte in once cycle and then the other 32 byte in the next cycle?
So it fetches half a cache line every cycle in the L1 I cache to place to the Picker 

If the four instructions span more than 
two 16-byte windows, only those instructions that are wholly contained in the two windows are 
decoded. Are instruction that spans more than two 16-byte placed in the next window?


The Op cache can send 64 bytes per cycle (8 macro ops) to the micro op queue bypassing the picker and decoder step. 
A transition from IC to OC mode is only possible at a branch target, and the machine generally remains in OC mode until an op cache miss occurs on a fetch address
So in other words if the code is in a loop and the instruction within the loop is large, causing thrashing to the Op cache.
The Op cache is 8 way set associative where each entry contains up to 8 sequential instruction ending in the same
64 byte alignment memory region, resulting in a max capacity of 4096 macro ops 
One an op cache hit the op cache receives a fetch address and enters macro ops into the micro op queue. If the machine was not in OC mode already the op cache stalls until
the instruction decoding pipeline is empty.
Op cache entry limit are:
1) 8 macro ops (instruction)
2) 8 32 bit immediate/displacement (64 bit immediate/displacement take two slots)
3) 4 microcode instruction


So in other words make sure that the macro ops in the loop is less than the maximum capacity of the op cache (4096)
and make sure there isn't any eviction due to maximum way capacity if possible.

// TODO: khal specify the instruction lay out [rex (1), opcode(1),]

There is 4 integer ALU scheduler, 2 AGU (Address Generation unit) sheduler, and a unified FP scheduler that
can issue up to 10 micro ops simultaneously to the ALU pipes (4), AGU pipes (2), and FP pipes (4) per cycle at maximum efficency 
The scheduler tracks operand availability and dependency information as part of its task of issuing micro ops to be executed.

So each Pipe works with only micro ops and not macro ops.
Making ADD qword ptr [rax + 0x8], IMM  use possible 3 micro ops (not 100 percent sure if it is 3 or 2).
1) move immediate
2) load memory
3) add

An integer pipe can execute two micro ops from different macro ops (one in the ALU and one in the AGU) at the same time.


L3 cache is chuncked between CCX (4 core sharing a slice of L3 cache).
When there is an L3 cache hit, the line is invalid from the L3 if the access was a store.
It is invalid from the L3 cache if the access was a load and the line was read by just one core.
It stays valid in the L3 if it was a code fetch.
It stays valid in the L3 if it was a load and the line has been read by more than one core.
The L3 cache maintain shadow tag for each L2 cache in the complex to allow probing L2 cache in the CCX.
Shadow tag are consulted if there is a L3 miss which check other core's L2 cache for data in the same CCX. If there is then a 
cache to cache transfer is initiated.

Calls and return are not eligible to be stored in the zero bubble predictor (L0 BTB). Therefore, function calls within hot loops 
can be inlined for better performance

Only the first pick slot (of 4) can pick instruction greater than eight bytes in length. Avoid having more than one instruction in a sequence
of four that is greater than 8 bytes in length.

SIMD
Avoid mixing packed integer operation with packed float point operation
Emphasize instruction that can be executed multiple pipes over those that can only be executed on a single pipe.
Keep store out of inner loops if possible
Use load execute instruction instead of discrete load and execute instruction when performing SIMD integer, SIMD floating point


Optimization tips

Reduce reduntant constant calculation (loop invariant calculation)
eg.

for i in 0..<20{
    if (SOMETHING0){
        //logic
    }else{
        //logic
    }
}

can be switch to 

if (SOMETHING0){
    for i in 0..<20{
        //logic
    }
}else{
    for i in 0..<20{
        //logic 
    }
}


Pad the struct so the size of the struct is a multiple of the largest member's type size

Use unsigned integer for the following:
1) Division, remainders, and multiplication
2) Loop counter
3) Array index 

Use signed integer for the following:
1) Integer to floating point conversion
2) Disabling overflow check 

The conversion between signed and unsigned integer is costless.

Use 32 bit GPR instead of their 64 bit extension if the required size is less then 32 bits.
In 64-bit mode, the machine-language representation of many instructions that operate on unsigned 
64-bit register operands requires a REX prefix byte, which increases the size of the code. Make sure that register (R8D-R15D) are
not used since they require REX prefix, otherwise use 64 bit register instead.


When performing integer computation, use load execute instruction instead of discrete load & execute instructions.
Use descrete load & execute instructions only under one or more of the following:
1) Explicitly schedule load & execute instructions
2) Avoiding scheduler stalls for longer executing instructions
3) The load target will be used multiple times in different instructions

Using load execute instruction improves performance for the following reason:
1) Dense code allows more work to be held in the I Cache 
2) Dense code generate fewer internal macro ops. allowing the scheduler to hold more work, which increases the chances
   of extracting parallelism from the code.

Use load execute instruction if register contention is high, leave it otherwise.

Use instruction forms with shorter encoding rather those with longer encoding.  Using shorter instructions increases the number of instruction 
that can fit into the L1 I cache and increases the average decode rate.

Avoid instruction that write less than 32 bits of a general purpose integer register
Avoid instruction that write less than 128 bits of an XMM register when using legacy SIMD instruction.
Avoid mixing legacy SIMD with AVX instruction. Legacy SIMD has merge dependency on the upper of the YMM destination while AVX doesn't

Avoid memory size mismatches when different instruction operate on the same data. Keep the loads/stores of each operand the same size.
Eg.
    mov dword ptr [rsp+0x10], eax 
    mov dword ptr [rsp+0x14], edx
    mov rcx, qword ptr [rsp+0x10]

A store-buffer entry cannot retire and 
write to the data cache until every instruction before the store has completed and retired from the 
reorder buffer
The implication of this restriction is that all instructions in the reorder buffer, up to and 
including the store, must complete and retire out of the reorder buffer before the load can complete. 
Effectively, the load has a false dependency on every instruction up to the store.

A load isn't allowed to read data from the store buffer entry if any of the following condition occur:
1) The start address of the load doesn't match the start address of the store.
2) The load operand size is greater than the store operand size.
3) Either the load or store is misaligned.
4) A high byte (or word) store and a low byte (or word) store in the same algined dword are followed by either a low or high byte (or word) load.

Interleave Load and store.
Load, Store, Load, Store, Load, Store, etc....

Reduce the size of instructions when possible.
Use shorter instruction that fastpath single - not fastpath double instructions.

Avoid conditional branches that depend on random data since it will be quite hard and inefficient to predict.

Prefer branches not taken to branches taken.
Correctly predicted taken branch have at least one prediction based bubble while not taken branches do not. In addition, taken branches consume more
branch resources.

If the loop has less than 40 micro ops total in all the branch legs that are executed, the micro op loop buffer will engage (Family 15).
Note that the 40 op restriction is a restriction on ops, not on instructions. 
Most XMM instruction are fast-path single, but YMM instruction are generally fast-path double. 

Inline a function that is called from just one site in the code and if the function contains fewer than 25 machine instruction.

Loop with a repeat count of up to 12 are predicted very well on Zen 1,2 and 3, 4 can predict loop with a count of up to 64.
Aim to have no function call in a branch to allow it to be in the BTB L0 

The execution units in the vector unit are divided into two domains, and integer vector domain and a floating point vector domain.
There is an extra latency of one clock cycle when the output of a uop in the integer vector domain goes to the input of a uop in the 
floating point domain, or vice versa.

There is a false dependency when the address of a memory read is spaced a multiple of 0x10000 bytes from a preceding write.
This effect is rarely seen on zen2 

Automatic hardware prefetching is more efficient than explicit software prefetching in most cases.

On Zen2 the Uops cache throughput is 5 to 6 instruction (macro ops) per cycle 0

String constant and Floating point constant are often stored in static memory, while integer constants are usually included as part of 
the instruction code (instruction bytes)

So integer constant may increase the instruction byte which may decrease I cache performance and Floating point constant
may use up cache space the D cache which may decrease caching performance.

Integer division is faster the smaller the integer size is on AMD processor, but not on intel processor.

Do not mix single & double precision in the same expression.
Converting from single to double and vice versa take around 2 to 15 clock cycles, so avoid converting floating point type.
Converting from single integer to a float or double takes around 4 to 16 clock cycle
Converting from floating point to integer takes around 50 to 100 clock cycle

A branch instruction take around 0 to 2 clock cycle in the case where it predicted correctly otherwise it will take around 12 to 25 clock cycle.

The return type of a function preferable be a simple type, a pointer, a reference, or void. 
Returning a objects of a composite type is more complex and often inefficient.

Instead of returning a composite object, you may consider the following alternative.
1) Make the function a constructor for the object.
2) Make the function modify an existing object rather than making a new one. (pass by pointer or reference)
3) make the function return a pointer or reference to a static object defined inside the function. (efficient, but risky)
4) Make the function construct an object with new and return to a pointer to it. (inefficient)

The code for accessing a data member is more compact if the offset of the member relative to the beginning of the struct or class is less than 128
because the offset can be expressed as an 8 bit signed number. Following this Big array or big structure should be placed in the last in the structure declaration
and most often used come first.


Use break mode on release mode to debug the assembly output.

The use of vector operations is more advantageous the smaller the data elements are. It also save space on the instruction byte

The size of each object (struct) should preferably be power of two.
eg.

Tester :: struct{
        a : i64,
        b : i64,
        c : i64,
        padding : i64,
}

Instruction with multiple prefixes can slow down decoding. There is a maximum number of prefixes that an instruction can have without slowing down decoding, depending on the CPU.

CPU have uop cache o a tiny loopback buffer for small loops. Avoid unecessary loop unrolling if there isn't a benfit to it even on small loops.

The fetching of code after an unconditional jump or a taken condition jump is delayed by typically 1-3 clock cycles depending on the microprocessor.
The delay is worst if the target is near the end of a 16 or 32 byte code fetch block.

On most processor, branches can interfere with each other in the global branch pattern history table & branch histroy register.

Use shorter constants and addresses. Many jump addresses, and data constant can be expressed as signed extended 8 bit constants.
This saves a lot of space, A signed extended byte can only be used if the value is within the interval from -128 to 127

For jump addresses. This means that short jumps take two bytes of code, whereas jumps beyond 127 bytes take 5 bytes if unconditional and 6 bytes if conditional
Likewise, data address take less space if they can be expressed as a pointer and a displacement between -128 and 127

Data constans may also take less space if they are between -128 adn 127. Most instruction wqith immediate operands have short form where the operand is a sign extended single byte.
The only instruction with an exception to this are the MOV, TEST, CALL and RET instruction.

In 64 bit mode, there are three ways to move a constant into a 64 bit register.
pefer moving a constant into a register with a 32 bit zero extended constant.
mov eax, 1000

mov rax, 12355436758790h ; is 10 bytes 
mov rax, -1000 ; is 7 bytes 
mov eax, 1000 ; is 5 bytes

64 bit code should preferably use 64 bit register size for base & index in addresses, and 32 bit register size for everything else.
If there is a 8 bit version which uses the 32 bit version of the register perfer this over 32 bit.
such as ADD (R32, I8) ; is 3 bytes without prefix verses ADD (R32, I32) ; is 6 bytes without prefix

Reading or writing to any data if in memory will result it to be cached in the L1 cache. It will fetch a cache line size, even if only a single byte is read from or written to.
Use all the fetched cache line as much as possible, since it will be hot in cache.

The caching of data works best if critical data are contained in small contigous area of memory.
The best place to store critical data is on the stack.

constant tables area typically stored in the data segment. It may be advantageous to copy such a table from the data segement to the stack outside the innermost loop. If this improve caching inside the loop.
static variable are typically store in the data segement.

Rarely accesed code such as error handling routines should be kept seperate from the critical hot spot code.

float compare instruction are less efficient than integer compare instructions.

The calculation of any expression that doesn't change inside the loop should be moved out of the loop.
The same applies to if else branches with a condition that doesn't change inside the loop.
This should be moved out and have loop/s inside the conditional statement/s

Jumps & calls inside the loop should be avoided because it can delay code fetching.
Procedure that are called inside the loop should be inlined if possible.
Braches inside the loop should be avoided if possible because they interfere with the prediction of the loop exit branch.
However, branches should not be replaced by conditional moves because this increase the length of the loop carry dependency chain.

The number of array accesed in the loop should not exceed the number of read/write buffer in the microprocessor.
One way of reducing the number of data streams is to combine multiple arrays into a single array of structure.





odin is a tool for managing Odin source code.
Usage:
        odin run [arguments]

        run     Same as 'build', but also then runs the newly compiled executable.
                Append an empty flag and then the args, '-- <args>', to specify args for the output.
                Examples:
                        odin run .                     Builds and runs package in current directory.
                        odin run <dir>                 Builds and runs package in <dir>.
                        odin run filename.odin -file   Builds and runs single-file package, must contain entry point.

        Flags

        -file
                Tells `odin run` to treat the given file as a self-contained package.
                This means that `<dir>/a.odin` won't have access to `<dir>/b.odin`'s contents.

        -out:<filepath>
                Sets the file name of the outputted executable.
                Example: -out:foo.exe

        -o:<string>
                Sets the optimization mode for compilation.
                Available options:
                        -o:none
                        -o:minimal
                        -o:size
                        -o:speed
                        -o:aggressive
                The default is -o:minimal.

        -show-timings
                Shows basic overview of the timings of different stages within the compiler in milliseconds.

        -show-more-timings
                Shows an advanced overview of the timings of different stages within the compiler in milliseconds.

        -show-system-calls
                Prints the whole command and arguments for calls to external tools like linker and assembler.

        -export-timings:<format>
                Exports timings to one of a few formats. Requires `-show-timings` or `-show-more-timings`.
                Available options:
                        -export-timings:json   Exports compile time stats to JSON.
                        -export-timings:csv    Exports compile time stats to CSV.

        -export-timings-file:<filename>
                Specifies the filename for `-export-timings`.
                Example: -export-timings-file:timings.json

        -export-dependencies:<format>
                Exports dependencies to one of a few formats. Requires `-export-dependencies-file`.
                Available options:
                        -export-dependencies:make   Exports in Makefile format
                        -export-dependencies:json   Exports in JSON format

        -export-dependencies-file:<filename>
                Specifies the filename for `-export-dependencies`.
                Example: -export-dependencies-file:dependencies.d

        -thread-count:<integer>
                Overrides the number of threads the compiler will use to compile with.
                Example: -thread-count:2

        -keep-temp-files
                Keeps the temporary files generated during compilation.

        -collection:<name>=<filepath>
                Defines a library collection used for imports.
                Example: -collection:shared=dir/to/shared
                Usage in Code:
                        import "shared:foo"

        -define:<name>=<value>
                Defines a scalar boolean, integer or string as global constant.
                Example: -define:SPAM=123
                Usage in code:
                        #config(SPAM, default_value)

        -show-defineables
                Shows an overview of all the #config/#defined usages in the project.

        -export-defineables:<filename>
                Exports an overview of all the #config/#defined usages in CSV format to the given file path.
                Example: -export-defineables:defineables.csv

        -target:<string>
                Sets the target for the executable to be built in.

        -debug
                Enables debug information, and defines the global constant ODIN_DEBUG to be 'true'.

        -disable-assert
                Disables the code generation of the built-in run-time 'assert' procedure, and defines the global constant ODIN_DISABLE_ASSERT to be 'true'.

        -no-bounds-check
                Disables bounds checking program wide.

        -no-type-assert
                Disables type assertion checking program wide.

        -no-crt
                Disables automatic linking with the C Run Time.

        -no-thread-local
                Ignores @thread_local attribute, effectively treating the program as if it is single-threaded.

        -lld
                Uses the LLD linker rather than the default.

        -use-separate-modules
                The backend generates multiple build units which are then linked together.
                Normally, a single build unit is generated for a standard project.
                This is the default behaviour on Windows for '-o:none' and '-o:minimal' builds.

        -no-threaded-checker
                Disables multithreading in the semantic checker stage.

        -vet
                Does extra checks on the code.
                Extra checks include:
                        -vet-unused
                        -vet-unused-variables
                        -vet-unused-imports
                        -vet-shadowing
                        -vet-using-stmt

        -vet-unused
                Checks for unused declarations.

        -vet-unused-variables
                Checks for unused variable declarations.

        -vet-unused-imports
                Checks for unused import declarations.

        -vet-shadowing
                Checks for variable shadowing within procedures.

        -vet-using-stmt
                Checks for the use of 'using' as a statement.
                'using' is considered bad practice outside of immediate refactoring.

        -vet-using-param
                Checks for the use of 'using' on procedure parameters.
                'using' is considered bad practice outside of immediate refactoring.

        -vet-style
                Errs on missing trailing commas followed by a newline.
                Errs on deprecated syntax.
                Does not err on unneeded tokens (unlike -strict-style).

        -vet-semicolon
                Errs on unneeded semicolons.

        -vet-cast
                Errs on casting a value to its own type or using `transmute` rather than `cast`.

        -vet-tabs
                Errs when the use of tabs has not been used for indentation.

        -custom-attribute:<string>
                Add a custom attribute which will be ignored if it is unknown.
                This can be used with metaprogramming tools.
                Examples:
                        -custom-attribute:my_tag
                        -custom-attribute:my_tag,the_other_thing
                        -custom-attribute:my_tag -custom-attribute:the_other_thing

        -ignore-unknown-attributes
                Ignores unknown attributes.
                This can be used with metaprogramming tools.

        -no-entry-point
                Removes default requirement of an entry point (e.g. main procedure).

        -minimum-os-version:<string>
                Sets the minimum OS version targeted by the application.
                Default: -minimum-os-version:11.0.0
                Only used when target is Darwin, if given, linking mismatched versions will emit a warning.

        -extra-linker-flags:<string>
                Adds extra linker specific flags in a string.

        -extra-assembler-flags:<string>
                Adds extra assembler specific flags in a string.

        -microarch:<string>
                Specifies the specific micro-architecture for the build in a string.
                Examples:
                        -microarch:sandybridge
                        -microarch:native
                        -microarch:"?" for a list

        -target-features:<string>
                Specifies CPU features to enable on top of the enabled features implied by -microarch.
                Examples:
                        -target-features:atomics
                        -target-features:"sse2,aes"
                        -target-features:"?" for a list

        -strict-target-features
                Makes @(enable_target_features="...") behave the same way as @(require_target_features="...").
                This enforces that all generated code uses features supported by the combination of -target, -microarch, and -target-features.

        -reloc-mode:<string>
                Specifies the reloc mode.
                Available options:
                        -reloc-mode:default
                        -reloc-mode:static
                        -reloc-mode:pic
                        -reloc-mode:dynamic-no-pic

        -disable-red-zone
                Disables red zone on a supported freestanding target.

        -dynamic-map-calls
                Uses dynamic map calls to minimize code generation at the cost of runtime execution.

        -disallow-do
                Disallows the 'do' keyword in the project.

        -default-to-nil-allocator
                Sets the default allocator to be the nil_allocator, an allocator which does nothing.

        -strict-style
                This enforces parts of same style as the Odin compiler, prefer '-vet-style -vet-semicolon' if you do not want to match it exactly.

                Errs on unneeded tokens, such as unneeded semicolons.
                Errs on missing trailing commas followed by a newline.
                Errs on deprecated syntax.
                Errs when the attached-brace style in not adhered to (also known as 1TBS).
                Errs when 'case' labels are not in the same column as the associated 'switch' token.

        -ignore-warnings
                Ignores warning messages.

        -warnings-as-errors
                Treats warning messages as error messages.

        -terse-errors
                Prints a terse error message without showing the code on that line and the location in that line.

        -json-errors
                Prints the error messages as json to stderr.

        -error-pos-style:<string>
                Available options:
                        -error-pos-style:unix      file/path:45:3:
                        -error-pos-style:odin      file/path(45:3)
                        -error-pos-style:default   (Defaults to 'odin'.)

        -max-error-count:<integer>
                Sets the maximum number of errors that can be displayed before the compiler terminates.
                Must be an integer >0.
                If not set, the default max error count is 36.

        -min-link-libs
                If set, the number of linked libraries will be minimized to prevent duplications.
                This is useful for so called "dumb" linkers compared to "smart" linkers.

        -foreign-error-procedures
                States that the error procedures used in the runtime are defined in a separate translation unit.

        -obfuscate-source-code-locations
                Obfuscate the file and procedure strings, and line and column numbers, stored with a 'runtime.Source_Code_Location' value.

        -sanitize:<string>
                Enables sanitization analysis.
                Available options:
                        -sanitize:address
                        -sanitize:memory
                        -sanitize:thread
                NOTE: This flag can be used multiple times.

        -ignore-vs-search
                [Windows only]
                Ignores the Visual Studio search for library paths.

        -resource:<filepath>
                [Windows only]
                Defines the resource file for the executable.
                Example: -resource:path/to/file.rc
                or:      -resource:path/to/file.res for a precompiled one.

        -pdb-name:<filepath>
                [Windows only]
                Defines the generated PDB name when -debug is enabled.
                Example: -pdb-name:different.pdb

        -subsystem:<option>
                [Windows only]
                Defines the subsystem for the application.
                Available options:
                        -subsystem:console
                        -subsystem:windows

